Propose a new API around Artifacts and their collections (#167)
konflux-ci/architecture: ADR/0035-artifact-streams.md

  creating multiple [Application]s that are related to each other just to resolve the visual representation
  challenges.
- Since a PipelineRun produces a single [Component], it becomes harder to support build strategies that produce
  multiple artifacts, i.e [ko].
- [Component]s are only defined in the context of an [Application] and cannot be moved. When a user wants to
  start building a Component, they need to either add it to a current [Application] and have its builds affecting
  the IntegrationTestScenarios results of the generated Snapshots or the component needs to be created in its
  own temporary   Application only to be deleted and recreated in the appropriate one once the builds are
  properly functioning.

## Decision

We are going to abstract the concepts of the built artifacts and their relationships to each other outside of
any other controller within AppStudio. If a controller wants to maintain complete separation from others (i.e.
in order to be fully deployable on its own), it may use an adapter pattern to convert this abstraction to its
own relevant internal data model.

> ### ArtifactConfig

Reviewer: It would be great to mention which CRs should be created by the users and which CRs are created by controllers as a result of a build (for example). For machine generated CRs, I think we should have a plan on how we offload those from the cluster to an external database (like we do for pipeline runs). This is needed in order to keep the history without overloading etcd and will also make migration of tenants between clusters easier.

Author: I agree that we should offload the information from the cluster so that we don't continue to hit the problems that we encounter today. A generic tool like [KubeArchive](https://github.com/adambkaplan/kubearchive) would be critical as we will be producing multiple CRs for each artifact produced by the system.

Reviewer: I is on our roadmap to maintain[KubeArchive](https://github.com/adambkaplan/kubearchive) ?

Reviewer 2: @gbenhaim the agogos team is considering adopting it. If they do, then the answer to your question is yes.

Note, the kubearchive repo moved to https://github.com/kubearchive/dynowatch

Reviewer 3: Silly question, given that these are going to need to be stored in some kind of off cluster database anyway, did anyone consider moving this data model off cluster into a RDBMS + REST service? If controllers need information about an object they can just query the REST API directly.

This means that current and historic data would all be in the same system, and it would reduce the load on etcd. 

There may be compelling reasons to keep the current on-cluster data storage, but if we are making a big change to the architecture it might be worth considering completely different approaches.

Reviewer: I totally agree with @stuartwdouglas. We must consider RDBMS + REST service.

Author: I don't think that we have had an ADR behind our decision to use CRs as a data model _and_ API. I assume that this was done back when the architecture was dependent on KCP as these resources would enable data to be shared and referenced regardless of where it was generated/used.

@ralphbean and I have had discussions in the past about whether we should use resources or events as interface models. This discussion falls in a similar vein.

> # 32. Decoupling Deployment

Reviewer 4: copy and paste error?

Author: Yes, thanks. I had forgotten that I copied the previous ADR for structure.

Date started: 2023-11-17

> Date accepted: 2023-02-01

Reviewer 5: Is this supposed to be 2024 or is the accepted date actually supposed to be after the started date?

Author: Yes, thanks. I had forgotten that I copied the previous ADR for structure.

  creating multiple [Application]s that are related to each other just to resolve the visual representation
  challenges.
- Since a PipelineRun produces a single [Component], it becomes harder to support build strategies that produce
  multiple artifacts, i.e [ko].
- [Component]s are only defined in the context of an [Application] and cannot be moved. When a user wants to
  start building a Component, they need to either add it to a current [Application] and have its builds affecting
  the IntegrationTestScenarios results of the generated Snapshots or the component needs to be created in its
  own temporary   Application only to be deleted and recreated in the appropriate one once the builds are
  properly functioning.

## Decision

We are going to abstract the concepts of the built artifacts and their relationships to each other outside of
any other controller within AppStudio. If a controller wants to maintain complete separation from others (i.e.
in order to be fully deployable on its own), it may use an adapter pattern to convert this abstraction to its
own relevant internal data model.

### ArtifactConfig

> An `ArtifactConfig` describes the metadata which is used to define an `Artifact`, an `ArtifactStream`, and

Reviewer 4: I eventually think some example CRs might help visualize this.

Author: Yeah, I can work on these eventually. I can see how it would be great to get them written up before this ADR is approved for sure. I wanted to get discussion started before I was able to work on example CRs since those haven't been in my mind specifically.

how `Artifact`s produced update that stream.

`Artifact`s do not exist in isolation to other `Artifact`s in the system, however, there are both explicit
and implicit relationships that exist between them, for example:

- (implicit) Multiple `ArtifactConfig`s can be created for the same repository and branch combinations. These

>   configurations would be allowed as long as the name of the produced artifact is unique. This supports use

Reviewer 4: > These
  configurations would be allowed as long as the name of the produced artifact is unique
an insight on how this would be achieved?

Author: That's a great challenge. I'll have to think about this more based on my recent push. I assumed that there would be a lazy resolution of an Artifact, so it wouldn't be until the PLR is completed that the uniqueness would be enforced. If there is an owner reference set, however, one challenge will be how to maintain that relationship without knowing the explicit owner reference.

If a single PLR is triggered that is known to produce multiple artifacts, then there could be multiple `Artifact`s created without knowledge of what the final resolved artifact is. Once the PLR is completed, the `Artifact`s will be updated to match their reference with the specific artifact that is build (i.e. one of multiple container images produced from `ko`).

# 35. Artifact Streams

Date started: 2024-02-05

## Status

Proposed

Relates to:

<!-- ... a lot ... -->

Supercedes:

<!-- ... a lot ... -->

## Authors

- Andrew M

## Context

Since the beginning of AppStudio, we have had a dependency on the [Component] and [Application] model that
originated in the Hybrid Application Service. A [Component] is a single containerized artifact that has

> information on how to build and deploy recorded in a linked [Devfile]. Multiple [Components] can be grouped

Reviewer 2: In the _current_ system, they must be grouped - or "are" grouped.

```suggestion
information on how to build and deploy recorded in a linked [Devfile]. Multiple [Components] are grouped
```

> together into a single [Application] to indicate that the should be deployed together via GitOps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
together into a single [Application] to indicate that they should be deployed together via GitOps.
```

Along with the [gitops-service] which was decided to stop deploying in [ADR 32. Decoupling Deployment],
the controllers' APIs and the UI for AppStudio have been tightly coupled with the concept of [Application]s
and [Component]s. For example, 

- PipelineRuns triggered by PipelinesAsCode produced a single image that is tied to a specific [Component]
  which is assumed to be an OCI artifact.
- The AppStudio UI (HAC) display PipelineRuns for all [Component]s in a single [Application] together.
- [Component]s are tied to artifacts produced from a single a git repository and branch.

This model presented multiple challenges including:

- If a user wants to build a new branch of an already onboarded git repository, they would need to create

>   a new [Component] (with a workspace-unique name).

Reviewer 6: @arewm  what if we don't want previous branch to be built any further? Can be existing component updated to ref a new branch?

  creating multiple [Application]s that are related to each other just to resolve the visual representation
  challenges.
- Since a PipelineRun produces a single [Component], it becomes harder to support build strategies that produce
  multiple artifacts, i.e [ko].
- [Component]s are only defined in the context of an [Application] and cannot be moved. When a user wants to
  start building a Component, they need to either add it to a current [Application] and have its builds affecting
  the IntegrationTestScenarios results of the generated Snapshots or the component needs to be created in its
  own temporary   Application only to be deleted and recreated in the appropriate one once the builds are
  properly functioning.

## Decision

We are going to abstract the concepts of the built artifacts and their relationships to each other outside of
any other controller within AppStudio. If a controller wants to maintain complete separation from others (i.e.
in order to be fully deployable on its own), it may use an adapter pattern to convert this abstraction to its
own relevant internal data model.

### ArtifactConfig

> An `ArtifactConfig` describes the metadata which is used to define an `Artifact`, an `ArtifactStream`, and

Reviewer 7: What metadata would be used to define an Artifact type?

And agreed with other comments re: example CRs 🙂

how `Artifact`s produced update that stream.

`Artifact`s do not exist in isolation to other `Artifact`s in the system, however, there are both explicit
and implicit relationships that exist between them, for example:

- (implicit) Multiple `ArtifactConfig`s can be created for the same repository and branch combinations. These
  configurations would be allowed as long as the name of the produced artifact is unique. This supports use
  cases like `ko` where multiple `Artifact`s would be produced from a single build

> - (explicit) A single `ArtifactConfig` can describe the configuration for producing the "same" `Artifact"

Reviewer 2: What is implied by putting "same" in quotes? Do you just mean that two different commits with two different git digests would produces two different binary images, but that two different ArtifactConfigs could be used to pipe them to a single ArtifactStream? Since they both feed the same ArtifactStream they can be thought of as being "the same" in that way?

Author: This use case would be to support versioning which is tied to the branches. There is likely little to no difference in how the `Artifact` is build from one branch to the next, but the content of the artifact changes.

> - (explicit) A single `ArtifactConfig` can describe the configuration for producing the "same" `Artifact"

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
- (explicit) A single `ArtifactConfig` can describe the configuration for producing the "same" `Artifact`
```

(Fix closing backquote)

  from multiple branches in the same git repository. As an `ArtifactConfig` also controls the creation of
  an `ArtifactStream`, `Artifact`s produced on any one of the branches would update the corresponding
  `ArtifactStream`.
- (explicit) A single repository and branch may produce different `Artifact`s under different conditions.
  When artifacts are produced as part of a pull request, for example, the controller will still need to
  generate `Artifact` resources, but these should not be able to update any `ArtifactStream`s for the 
  on-push build events

> ### Artifact

Reviewer 9: By storing Atrifact resources we make etcd effectively assume the role of a container registry or an Artifactory server except for storing the actual build result bits. That may not scale.

Do we really need that? Perhaps its sufficient to define ArtifactStrteam as a generalized pointer to registries, package repositories, etc.

Reviewer 2: It may be worth elaborating what use cases the Artifact-as-a-custom-resource solves. Why not just treat OCI pullspecs as artifacts? Could rest of the proposal stand (ArtifactConfig and ArtifactStream and ArtifactCollection and ArtifactCollectionStream) even if Artifact itself is dropped?

> ### Artifact

Reviewer 7: How are different artifact "types" defined? I assume the `ArtifactConfig` would determine that, but can it be any type, or is it restricted to specific types (rpm, fbc, etc), which may have their own validation? (E.g. you mention some validation for RPM-based `Artifact`s farther below)

An `Artifact` represents a single object (binary or non-binary artifacts) produced as part of a software
supply chain. It not only defines the storage location of the object itself but also the location of any
additional supporting metadata like produced SBOMs, provenance, and signatures (and the public gpg keys).

> Since the concept of an `Artifact` exists outside of any other controller, the object may either be manually

Reviewer 7: Is there a risk of creating duplicate`Artifact`s that refer to the same object?

created based on known artifacts or a constructor may be leveraged to watch for specific actions (i.e. within
the kubernetes cluster or new artifacts being pushed to an external location) in order to produce the resulting
`Artifact`. An example of this constructor can resemble the `TestSubjectConstructor` as proposed in
[Upstreaming integration-service].

`Artifact`s can also store references to the process which created the object (i.e. PipelineRun). As soon as a
PipelineRun is created, an `Artifact` should be created to enable visibility into the ongoing process if
an `ArtifactStream` is used for tracking or visualization.

### ArtifactStream

> All `Artifact`s have an owner reference to a single `ArtifactStream`. The `ArtifactStream` keeps track of the latest

Reviewer 2: Can Artifacts be members of multiple ArtifactStreams?

Author: No

produced `Artifact` that has been created owned by that stream (i.e. similar to a floating tag reference).

A validation webhook will prevent an `Artifact` from being created unless its configuration matches that of its owning

> `ArtifactStream`.

Reviewer 9: What does "configuration matches" mean in this context?

### ArtifactCollection

> An `ArtifactCollection` is a set of `Artifact`s that are grouped together. An `ArtifactCollection` can include

Reviewer 7: What would a typical grouping of `ArtifactCollections` contain, in terms of types of `Artifact`s?

And could we achieve a similar level of grouping with labels on the resourecs, rather than creating another resource type to group them? Maybe something like:
```
labels:
   artifactCollection: <some-collection>
```

references to other `ArtifactCollection`s to enable intermediate logical separation and aggregated groupings.
Additionally, there are no restrictions around how many `ArtifactCollection`s a given `Artifact` may belong to.

### ArtifactCollectionStream

All `ArtifactCollection`s have an owner reference to a single `ArtifactCollectionStream`. The `ArtifactCollectionStream`

> defines the set of `ArtifactStream`s and `ArtifactCollectionStream`s that are allowed in the owned `ArtifactCollection`s.

Reviewer 10: Could you explain: `'ArtifactCollectionStream's that are allowed in the owned 'ArtifactCollection's.`?

The `ArtifactCollectionStream` also defines whether any individual update to a contained stream results in the automatic

> generation of a new owned `ArtifactCollection`. The `ArtifactCollectionStream` keeps track of the latest produced

Reviewer 10: I'm afraid, that with this approach we'll end up in many separate resources created. This is similar to current snapshots problem.

`ArtifactCollection` owned by that stream.

A validation webhook will prevent an `ArtifactCollection` from being created unless all contained `Artifact`s and
`ArtifactCollection`s match its owning `ArtifactCollectionStream`.

## Consequences

- If any controller does not want to interface with the `Artifact*` CRs directly (i.e. to achieve independence
  from other controllers within AppStudio), they will need to create an adapter pattern between the relevant
  APIs and their own internal data model.
- We should now have native ability to describe built artifact and their various supply chain related attestations.

>   This ability holds whether the artifact is built within the kubernetes cluster or outside of it.

Reviewer 10: Do you mean that a user can build an artifact somewhere and add a record of it in the system?

- We lose the simplification of having a common [Component] and [Application] data model requirement between
  all controllers as the relationships with `Artifact`s and related resources are loose couplings

> - We will have to produce multiple adapters for the various controllers in order to achieve data model independence

Reviewer 7: This would probably be my biggest concern, both from the amount of work / maintenance required, but also in terms of consistency. Do we need to rethink 

You mention: 
> While each of the controllers that compose AppStudio should be able to exist on their own, they can all
  "come together" around a common description of produced artifacts in order to create a unified build, test,
  and delivery pipeline

How would we ensure consistency across the various controllers that would need to implement an adapter? Having the common Application-Component data model helped to enforce that _somewhat_ (though we occasionally still had times where two controllers interpreted things differently), but that wouldn't be the case here.

- While each of the controllers that compose AppStudio should be able to exist on their own, they can all
  "come together" around a common description of produced artifacts in order to create a unified build, test,

>   and delivery pipeline.

Reviewer 10: What is the rationale of the adapters? Data model independence? It looks somewhat controversially to me. We want independent controllers but creating dependencies with adapters (are they also controllers?). Will independent components be usable on its own?
